afternoon everyone my name is Travis
Browne and the graphics imaging
evangelist and it's my pleasure to
welcome you to vertex programming with
OpenGL session 205 and sort of the theme
that we have in this year's WC is the
aspect of leveraging the GPU and and the
graphics imaging overview yesterday we
showed a lot of examples of using
program ability to do interesting things
because an interesting visual effects
those are fragment programs but there's
also sort of a companion technology or
another way to program the GPU called
vertex programming which instead of
touching fragments and therefore pixels
it's actually maybe using the GPU to do
very high-speed geometry calculations
the two go hand in hand in terms of the
ways you can really offload the burden
of doing the graphics from the cpu from
the cpu and allow the GPU to do what it
does best which is work with geometry
and then obviously draw that geometry so
it's my pleasure to welcome our speaker
today mike larson up to this stage so
you can take you to the presentation
thanks Travis today we're here to talk
about vertical grabbing with opengl it's
been around for a couple years starting
with the ATI RV 200 in that generation
so we'll talk about a little bit let's
start out we're go through an
introduction to vertex programs we're
going to talk about vertex programs in
the OpenGL pipeline the computation
model used by the vertex program the
program since X for the our vertex
program and go through a number of
examples and starting from simple ones
using shader builder and some more
complicated one using the project
builder
so starting out why is vertex programs
so much Oh get this button faizan you
vert fragment program a lot of the
inputs that go into a fragment program
come out of the vertex program you might
have texture coordinates you might have
some bearing position coordinate to come
through or system generally it will
probably end up using vertex programs if
you're using fragment program say your
application doesn't fit into the
standard OpenGL lighting pipeline you've
got an existing lighting model that you
want to implement in vertex program and
you don't want to change that to the
OpenGL one you can you can use a very
extra much for that say your application
is pre-processing a vertex rays or every
time you draw an object you're touching
the data one way to get rid of that
touching the data sea view time is
actually moving up the vertex program
isolate that that part of your program
actually does that and move it up that
examples would be surfaces and vertex
cleaning in between it's from keyframe
animation it's an old old term you know
yeah the general cartoonist and the
people who do everything in between so
it's called tweening
so the benefits of a vertex program
essentially we can be offloading
functionality from the cpu to the GPU
you have more flexible per vertex
geometric operations higher performance
and lower memory usage let's talk about
vertex programs in OpenGL pipeline so
here's the old fixed model you start out
with the OpenGL vertices you have your
standard molecule transformation the
color materials and the lighting effects
and your prospective division and that's
been replaced with vertex program
essentially your vertex program replaces
a lot of same functionality that was
quote a fixed functionality a lot of
that was actually included in microcode
you're just inching allowing you to use
that as microcode the FBI machines for
years you microphylla for all these
transforms so what changes your program
if you're using vertex program you're
now responsible for doing all the
transformations the color materials and
lighting the whole whole slew of other
issues if you're using the OpenGL color
lighting model and if once you if you're
using them and you disable them if you
you're here's a scenario i'll say you're
switching out of vertex program and
you're expecting the standard OpenGL
lighting model be there you have to
disable them or you'll get everything
rover runs to the vertex program
regardless let's talk about the
computation model
so what invokes a vertex program well
there's a number of standard methods to
find the herb spec say that the issuing
a GL vertex command which usually kicks
off some kind of operation indirectly
through OpenGL about vertically draw
elements or jaw ll raise commands the
current raster position is changed and
simply a a vertex program terminates at
the end of reaching the end of the
program so a computation model is you
have independent execution on each
vertex there can be and I likely are 24
vertex in each GPU temporary data so
from we write a program you kind of feel
there's going to be data left over but
vertex program you need you run the
program you've done and it's all gone so
the input output model you have your
vertex program you have virtuous data
inputs which be your position color
textures coordinates and those kinds of
values environment parameters OpenGL
state let me talk about environment
parameters real quick environment
parameters are values that you can load
up to your vertex program through GL or
across all works program or for a single
one and OpenGL state information which
would see the current lighting model and
a number of a matrix matrix is available
from open geo the addition you have a
number of temporary registers these
water
available for youth why are your
activating the vertex program and then
lunch program completes competition for
each value to the color the position and
everything else you spit out to the
vertex data output and once you reach
the end at vertex program you sit out
everything to your output register you
turn and vertex program stops and kicks
it off to the thrust of the engine so
what's available to vertex program you
know standard attributes position color
texture coordinates and additional
programmable attributes that you set
OpenGL transform and lighting state so
the parameter information is read only
by the program its defining the spec
essentially constant values from the
from the arm from Center this program
from outside you can you can program
them up using environment commands from
OpenGL there's two types there's global
parameters which say you have multiple
vertex programs you can load up across
these environment parameters across all
vertex program or you have local
parameter which is only affect the
current vertex program running so the
instruction set is limited to about 27
instructions they're focused on
transformer lighting number this is kind
of like a micro code implementation
exposed out so they're very limited
there's no loops no branches you have
limited program length some instructions
are macros which means up you know you
have instructions they're complicated
that might do mobile things in one
operation they might actually be two
instructions within or two or three
instructions and they are defined by the
spec well not all pro instructions can
be will require two of two instructions
or more
so oops Lynette this data operon the
scalar operand which are you know
standard floating points values and
cindy operations which are also zach
type values for 40 point values indexed
by X Y Z and W we are this is a color
texture what they're always index closed
the same the same thing all data and all
operations is a representative that
cindy float for so regardless of what
you you know you think you're loading up
a single value it's always
representatives for value so data
component selection you have a normal
skin the operation like an altar that
construction you know a equals B
something you got some input parameter
goes to some operation it gets flushed
out the bottom and they all get set you
have a Swizzle simdi selection which
allows you to move data between
components so it's on the input select
it's not on the output select so if you
have a to source component you might
have a source a might be XYZ and source
be might be vzz you can select them all
same one you have a scalar mass
operation which is these are the scalar
operations you can select which source
operation or source component you want
for the operation so if you're doing
like a reciprocal divide and you want to
see the reciprocal of why you
essentially select why
the instruction set has a number of
standard scalar and cindy instructions
if i could see an altivec you have your
standard add subtract multiply and add
multiply and adds a very important
struction it's not a macro it's a one
struck one instruction you can do a lot
with mobile ads and you'll see in the
example I'll show you you have absolute
value minimum and maximum dot product
disinfector the real lighting you can
see the lighting in here and reciprocal
functions math functions you are pretty
limited you have you know the exponent
base to floor fraction and log base two
and then more complex complex
instructions you have component
selection lighting conditional set on
compare does amount like you think
anyways but it's well show you how it
works and indirect registers load from
parameter space so you can't you can't
modify your temporary registers you
can't index them through address in
director at addressing only parameters
can be indirect values so let's look at
the constraints these are the base
requirements for all vertex program
implementation so if you write a vertex
program the base implementation will
have this many values it has 96 program
environments 96 local values 8 program
matrices one address register 120
instructions and 12 temporary registers
now spec allows for anything more than
that but you these are the beige
requirements that you can you can you
can look look to have an all-in
implementation so how do you find out
what your new piece of hardware has you
are 300 or whatever you put in there um
used essentially GL program are an
integer value and queries the interface
and what's there there's a whole bunch
of a pneum that you can ask for and see
what see what's out there
let's talk about this in text all
programs must start with the version
signature of our vertex program one
point 0 must terminate with an end
statement and just about anything in
between is ok it has loose you know
their temper temporary and parameter
variable definitions you don't define
all your attempts at top you can define
them in line just as long you know
before you is just like C++ so what is
the syntax it's it's effectively a GPU
independent assembly language it's not
targeting any specific GPU it's
independent of all types it's not see
and it's not pure assembly there's no
fixed register allocation you don't it's
independent like I said its GPU
independent it's they're loaded as
strings there's run time to pile up by
by the driver ati and video whoever and
there's no fixed allocation of GPU
register
so three kinds of parameters you have
the concert parameters which are not
programmable from your program you have
the environment program the parameters
which are programmable across all vertex
program and you have local parameters
which are specific to the currently
bound vertex program you have temporary
registers could you to start off with
the temps and you can aim off up to 12
you'd be surprised how few you actually
have to use key thing about using
temporary registers is you get a mindset
from altivec or whatever you're used to
programming on of you know creating a
whole bunch of data and then having a
result in store them away the key thing
about using the temporary registers for
vertex program is computed results and
stick it in the result as fast you can
and reuse that temporary register then a
number of urinary binary and ternary
instructions you know reciprocals may
have and adds and multiplies those
things so just to look at the
instruction set real quick this just
comes out of the arms back you see the
instruction on that you have a defined a
set of inputs everything just pretty
much everything takes a vector input
might have two sources the output that's
the important part by looking at the
spec is you might have it might be a
scalar function or it might be a vector
op a cindy operation you can see the
flavor of the instructions and the
syntax that's used and more additional
instructions you can look at the sum of
math functions of power to reciprocal
the reciprocal square root all all those
instructions are scalar outputs so you
have to select a particular if you want
to square root of some value like a
square root of the Y value it's going to
be spread across all the outputs and
it's an absolute show them this an
example
so we're to get more information on our
vertex program well the shader builder
in the development tool just comes for
free and it's a great place to start it
has active syntax checking you're not
going to you have to build a framework
and build a program to make it work and
just turn it on start the island way and
please work let's talk about loading
program and controlling the execution
environment for vertex programs so
vertex programs are loaded its strength
like I said that runtime compiled by
these by the driver essentially there's
only one way to do it today they left
they've left ways to do it different
ways in future but strings are the only
today it has active syntax checking so
after you try a load of vertex program
you can test to get the GL get error and
if you call a GL get string with its new
it'll actually come back the string
reporting the actual position in the
code where the air was found which is
very useful so you'll find out so
loading like I said there's parameters
you have environment parameters there's
a specific call from loading environment
parameters its program a and B parameter
and they're all loaded Cindy values
there's no way to load a scalar value
everything gets loaded Cindy also
there's an equivalent call for local
parameters you know GL local parameters
and they also get loaded Cindy let's go
through a basic vertex program what's
going to do it's a effective leader
shader builder example maybe a little
bit simplified we're going to do a model
you perspective transform of an input
vertex and set the result and moving on
you
so we are here we have shader builder
and bring it up a little bit
let's look around here a little bit you
have essentially your your code input
here
this is actually loaded as a vertex
program it's like it's the you have to
load it before any begin end statement
by the way you can't you can't change it
while you're doing it to get even well
you know draw rays and draw elements
have implied begin in but effectively
before begins statement you better be
doing you have you have to have it
slowed as a program ok so let's go
through this again you have your editor
in interface right here you can enable
disable the vertex program you have a
number of objects available to draw your
you think your test your vertex program
out on you have the sphere t pas de he'd
run plane I think I think is actually
called cool everybody drives cheaper and
you have a your dl per hour and you can
dial up color you can change the color
on the fly go to crayons that's right
here we go you can also select a number
of texture units available for input you
can load them up and select them through
this this interface but today we're just
going to use protection unit 0 and you
can enable or disable it turns things on
so and then over here you have a bunch
of debugging information I'm not going
to go through it you know it's
essentially allows you to step through a
vertex program and watch the values
change in addition shader builder has an
instruction reference that comes up over
here so you're not digging around the
r-spec 64 pages long and it's but it's
really detailed you want to read it it
really gets there you know okay but you
can actually have online documentation
of all the instructions and what they're
supposed to do so let's go back
turn it off so start the program out our
vertex program one point oh I have an
offset a scale and a zero value it's the
constant throw it in here I have even
once you program enough you start
throwing in your standard you know cut
paste and I have a whole bunch of
standard values I use all the time you
know here's a temporary value the vertex
position let's show you example of the
runtime compile sorry inliner chick so I
see ship comes up with an error saying
there's something wrong here and if you
look at the bottom it says line 9
actually if you did the deal error check
and actually pulled that string out like
I show them a previous example able to
turn this same value so as you work into
project builder example and you start to
label yourself just about all your
vertex programs will pull that string
out just to help you out so let's start
up right here i'm just adding a here's
the vertex position right here that's an
input value that comes from the program
here's a here's a temporary called beep
beep box and a zero value so i can
inline axe it can actually add an offset
and they actually automatically adds of
the program i can change that offset
real time these are great tools by the
way
you know what one thing i do a lot is i
actually get a program up and running
here cut and paste it stick it in a file
and add to my project builder and then
once I if I develop errors in the
program I always come back and paste it
in here see where the air is a and right
here so I'm taking the vertex position
the ring from the from the input
assigning to a temporary but by doing an
ad of an offset and then I'm multiplying
by some scale value and you can comment
all this stuff out just like that it's
pretty easy so moving on then we do the
transform of the value we can messing
around with we set the result color now
you can set these two anything you want
to I want to spent too much higher but
you know that doesn't work
alright and then also set the text
coordinate so that's an example of a
basic vertex program within shader
builder it's pretty simple it's probably
10 instructions five inches long so
let's go back
so we're going to go through an extra
ring go through a lighting vertex
program that's another major youth for
verdicts program for like I said if you
don't have standard GL lighting model if
you want to use what we're going to do
is we're going to use shader builder
essentially the same example Kim's later
development example area we're going to
model view the transferring of a video
booth verdict perform some lighting
computations and then move on to the
demo
a little more complex
ok
so I want to remove some function out
here before I moved on too much I'll
leave that up with Naomi so you can look
at this in stages thing being applied in
stages at rib you know effectively it's
a pound of flying I mean it really is so
if you want to use nice names for
standards input values you can call them
at ribs you have now I have two
parameters here and if you notice in
this parameter right here I'm sharing a
whole bunch of values rather than
creating multiple parameter variables
I'm jamming a four scalar value three
scalar values into one simdi value
you'll save parameter space and it will
end here's your life position so what we
go through here we do our model view
perspective transform now we start
computing the lighting value-based like
position then we start issuing a light
instruction and then we add that to the
to the current value so this is standard
shading stuff and then here we had a
little funk shading to it so we could
see the nice thing about this tools you
can do things right in line and test
them as you go as you develop say you
would develop a bug through here you can
comment it out real time and actually
see what part of the program is actually
messing up and then we go through and
remove this is the result of the outputs
position and the color so those two
simple examples of how to use vertex
program and the shader builder we're not
going to talk about shooter well too
much we move on some new new ideas so as
far as sheeter building goes it's a
great place to start it's great tool you
load up textures you don't have to build
a framework you can get started today it
also provides active syntax checking for
you know of your vertex program as they
develop in addition as you start out it
has online instruction information
so far as program possibilities you know
a lot of people you know you look at the
instruction set it's it's rather small
of lighting focused the code space is
pretty small we're all used to having
much code as you want to and the number
of temperature temporary registers is
actually pretty small but you'd be
surprised what you can actually do is
that you can do surfaces you can do
active displacements you can do
real-time displacements you can do
advanced lighting effects keyframe
animation and visual computations so
let's go some real quick tips from an
application standpoint best way to use
vertex program is using vertex raise
combined with vertex array ranges key
thing about this is you're moving all
the CPU from the issuing and fetching of
all the vertex raise so you're keeping
the CPU out of the equation use a
compound selection to save parameter
space so rather having you know like
mobile parameters defined like one to
the runtime supplier is not gonna be
able figure this out stick them together
in addition use a compound parameter
save yourself reciprocal multiply save
it by actually pre computing these fixed
values and combining in one array so
here I have factorial 67 twenty- 720 the
inverse of that and the negative of that
additional programming tip these are
things I've had to figure out at once
only one value for some instructions can
be selected and at some point you might
want to merge all those values back into
the same vector of our same 50 value and
start computing again rather than
generating a single scalar value and
then doing a whole bunch of work on
generating another sim scalar value
doing how much to work on it you might
want to merge all back together and just
compute them like you would using alt of
X so you can use the Select parameter
and I multiply add instruction
to merge everything back together this
shows how you're using your doing a
reciprocal on 33 values and then you're
starting to merge them back together by
two and multiply add back into one value
this actually is quite helpful
conditional selection there is no you
know branches so how do you do
conditional selection well the only way
really do it is through multiplies so
you have a you have a value say you want
to do if a greater than equal to B been
assigned sequels a or some of that you
have to do you know set greater than
equal which actually set it doesn't
actually what does it sets the if it's
if it's true it sets the output to one
so you're going to use that one value to
multiply against the input value and
it's so it's either going to be one or
zero and a mad instruction in between
that merges the two together as like
it's like a conditional would so I've
got down to four instructions and
there's no branches so let's talk about
vertex programs for surfaces so a lot of
the lighting functionality for vertex
program is actually moved down the
fragment program you can get perfect cyl
lighting so what else can you do with
this this is a pretty powerful little
tool here you have here so rather than
tweaking with your where two verses
every time you want to move from a
position or you want to find a new shape
to see the UV mesh essentially to
two-dimensional mesh that you create
once and you never touch it again so the
vertex programs can compute the XYZ
position of all the values you can be
surprised that you can do with it you
can do quadratic surfaces implicit
surfaces parametric surfaces you can do
bilinear interpolation busier b-splines
and nerves all critics program so what's
a what's UV mesh well you be matched the
2d mesh it's bounded by u and v u and v
could be bond between any kind of fixed
value
parametric surface such as 80 surfaces
and nerves b-splines we've gone between
zero and one implicitly for the whole
surface so you know why would you want
to use a vertex program for surface well
you'll have to define one mesh one match
for all all your objects and by using
that you never have to touch your virtus
again you can load them up from DRAM and
you'll never see them again you can
animate surfaces using control
parameters will show an example that and
you're offloading the work from the cpu
the GPU let's uh let's talk about the
implicit surface vertex program cool
math singing stick it off the web page
you know that's three sine values I get
a USB for x and y sine of U and V for x
and y and then for control parameters
combined with you and be so it's the
final Z value so we're going to build a
birthday will the UV mesh with a vertex
array we're going to bound it between
negative PI and PI and have some number
of steps in between so and then we're
going to fill in the position with the
UV mesh U and V i sees the Z 0 is
actually right here the U and V are just
input parameters vertex program so we're
going to create our program debug it
through shader builder and load it as a
program string then we r load the shape
control parameters the ABC and D you
seen in previous equation as local
parameters and then we're a submit a
number of quad strips and as a for
drawing
so here's our object in line format d
this is actually a one two dimensional
UV mesh being input and it's very it's
finally capsulated and if all the
positions are being computed by the
vertex program right here our control
parameter we can dial in anything we
want change the shape tear it apart so
these are the ABS and sees everybody
sees this wants to go out and do not and
stuff like that good luck but you do a
lot of cool stuff so let's do a little
demo here
right now for computing shape on applied
it similar once in the vram not come
across a GP at all vector coordinates
are being submitted by the vertex
program built on the tapes beach
deterred by the equalizer value I'm
touching them with an OpenGL context
right here I'm pulling the input from a
good time and here's the volume
[Music]
that example it's fun so what you see
there you've seen a vertex program that
competed the object shape and color and
the texture coordinates the control
value is a B and C D were fed up as
control Prem so one cindy value per
frame was loaded up and it computed
everything else based on that one value
there's no sign function so how do I can
choose that I use a McLaren power series
you could do you can do a lookup but it
just about as much work as doing McLaren
because you're going to do in direct
address register loads and all that
stuff so and then once I had the values
computed i computed all three signed
values the same time using an alternate
similar code so let's take a little
program about a small up here you guys
see that dim the lights name so there's
an input parameter ABCD for temporary
values not a whole lot so the surface
was described by you know to fix UV
values for X&Y and then the control
parameter for the shape are in the Z so
i had to compute those on the vertex
program rather than stuffing the vertex
array every time new values so that's
about two constructions there it's
that's example the syntax it's very
assembly like then I'm cranking on and
I'm starting to compute the sign values
through a number of terms so if you
notice I'm doing a multiply and a mad
instruction and I'm continually moving
on then we do a few more term
we set the output position so once i
have the output position I jam it away
because I'm gonna use that temporary
value again and then i set the texture
coordinates to some input value which is
actually get time I jammed it in the EQ
0 1 2 3 x value and then I add it to the
vertex coordinate and it's that guy's
been normalized between 0 and 1 and
that's it so where do you go from there
try doing waves waves are actually
pretty simple very similar use cosine
functions you can have essentially
multiple meters you think about things
bobbing up in water in the water you
have three four bobbing the water and
for each point on the on your water you
just simply compute how far you are away
from that the cosine emitter and
computer your Z value on that and then
some across all the emitter xin the
whole thing there's a demo tomorrow that
shows this is pretty cool so let's go
through NURBS actually I had violating
your surfaces b-splines and everything
else figured out nervous took awhile to
figure out how to do them so why is this
why is the vertex program for NURBS most
people who use Newton herbs in OpenGL
have already figured out that nerves is
slow you have to do multiply accumulate
across the number of control points and
they've either rolled their own nerves
evaluators you can store multiple
patches as a single vertex array and
just load up control points for each
patch you can do automatic level of
detail based on how close the patches to
the user or the screen by selecting
multiple different you viver meshes so
what's nerve actually the Maya come to
the airport my book dropped out and a
guy comes up and goes what's an herb and
I got to about non-uniform rational his
eyes glazed over you walk away
so well people said nobody really
understands there's actually that's what
remains would so its surface defined by
interpolating a number of control points
it's used a lot in cat dominant in cat
for because it can do spherical and a
number of things you can't do with
Bezier surfaces if you want more
information on nerves i'm not going to
explain how they work here go search for
introduction to nerves in the web or
rogers has a pretty good book on it and
is very simple to read so we're doing
outline of how to draw an herb using a
vertex program we're going to compute
the b-spline basis functions for that
particular nerve on the host it's
recursive evaluator that's the biggest
problem I had with figuring out how to
do it on the vertex shaders is it's
recursive function there's no branches
there's no calls or no jobs so how to
compute it on the host that's actually
pretty good thing because you only
compete at once and you never do it
again so the low in your load the
control points as local program
parameters and then you can do the same
thing for your position your normal your
texture coordinates they just get loaded
as control parameters they don't get
loaded with a new new mesh since you
just control point parameters so you're
you're only loading 16 points for each
parameter that you want to load in this
example so this example is a four by
four controlled mesh position
information is interpolated vertex
program real simple example on the
implementation side say a 4 4 by 4
control mesh if you don't know anything
about nerve that means are going to have
16 control points 16 basis functions /
UV value and that's that's a lot of
storage so what I do is I actually post
multiply the basis functions in terms of
rows and call them on the vertex program
as I go along and that's essentially
reduces the the
the requirements down to a float if you
just look a little you know formula
right here you see you know the UV point
is the sum of your number of control
points which is 16 then you have to set
the basis functions one for the rose and
one for the column this is a demo so we
our surface I put a texture on it just
to show you know there's a UV that I use
come here in the left hand there it's
actually quite a few number points
10,000 points 100-500 grid there's the
there's a number of the control points
right here you can grab the control
points you'd move the surface real time
it's all been computed on the vertex
program then loaded as a meshed UV mash
and vram it never gets never goes across
the AGP bust more than one and you can
do a lot of fun things with it nerve is
actually very flexible surface
there we go so that's cool so let's talk
about what we've seen Nash 100 110
thousand point if you do the math just
for the position only that's 96,150
thousand flops the hostess didn't have
to do a full screen application on it at
1280 x 1 k75 frames per second not blah
de blah blah it's about a gigaflops just
the position only so if you want to add
textures and normals of that you can add
on entry three giggles Bob and the GPUs
can do it let's talk about the program
real quick hopefully you're not
straining your eyes I have to to input a
you basis and a V basis there's for
floating-point Cindy values their bring
them in through the vertex position and
the color and have a number of control
points as program locals and then show
mall there's number of 16 so here I am
I'm pre computing a post you know post
multiplying the basis functions to come
up with the the required basis functions
I need for each row column combination
so i multiply post multiply and then I
start my multiply accumulate on all the
control points as I go along for each
point for this example there's four it's
a four by four so it's four rows so
there's four sets of these things I go
along continually computing the new
basis functions and I finally end up
with a final position do a transform I
have a result position and then I start
then I just move the texture coordinate
long if the texture was normalized
between zero one flips it across the
whole surface
so where do you go from here pretty cool
stuff well you can add you can import
the position and normal and the color
information texture information from a
modeler program directly into this you
can design vertex programs for different
sized meshes you know three by five you
know anything anything that value if you
look at the number of instructions that
take let you figure out work you know
that you're bound to a certain size you
can't interpolate you know 10 by 10
control matches there's just not enough
space in the vertex program to do that
and then you can actually do I haven't
30 have I know you can do it subdivision
surfaces subrogation services people
have always said that they're
algorithmic they're always like a
similar to be slime but if he looks at
there's an exact solution for
subdivision surfaces in siggraph 98 in
the back end of it so we actually sat
down figured it out so that was on the
biggest problem of implementing
subdivision surfaces you know if you
want to do very simple demo violating
resurfaces are easy Bezier surfaces you
compute the basis functions on it on
vertex program and neuro feel it more
complicated like instead of users
recursions of his ears are simple so
let's do a wrap-up so vertex program
there a powerful tool for shading and
lighting you can use custom lighting
models outside the OpenGL lighting model
you can add additional complexity to
your geometries and vertex program and
also you can actually load a lot finer
level detail I mean if you look at some
of the games out there today the level
detail is terrific you know you can use
UV meshes to define most surfaces and
once the UV mesh is defined you can load
in vram and i'll never go across the AGP
bus again you said you can lower the cpu
load for for most applications and
you're seeing up to a hundred times
faster performance than having the host
compute those kinds of values
so where do you start start with a
shader builder start with simple
transforms you know play with the scale
play with the position move those things
around change of color gives get a
feeling for how the language works move
on to lighting model actually skip the
lighting model don't expect services but
as I am and then move on to simple UV
meshes try an implicit surface models
come with your crazy cool naphthenes and
then start exploring b-splines and nerve
everything else so more information on
the ARB vertex program you can read the
spec it's 60 pages long and very
detailed lots of information in there
and it gives you a kind of a guideline
of what things are supposed to do or you
can go to use shader builder I'm going
to try and have these these posted in
the next couple weeks hopefully yeah
yeah and then or for the old Mac OpenGL
mailing list
thank you Michael now I swear what I
want to do is just do a quick you know
twirl for the road map here we have
plans for the remaining sessions talking
about open jail and also the graphics
technology and Mac OS 10 I think we're
actually on Wednesday obviously so what
we have remaining for you tomorrow in
the OpenGL track is essentially fragment
programming with open jail this is the
sort of more pixel specific companion to
the programmability it's also gonna be a
really cool session lots of interesting
demos so if you're interested in
programmability unlocking the power of
the GPU should also attend that session
we also have obviously we're talk
tomorrow about our course 2d technology
which is also relevant for OpenGL
developers because one of the things we
announced in our graphics imaging
overview session yesterday is the
ability to use 2d drawing API to draw
directly into an OpenGL context that can
also be very exciting for OpenGL
developers because they can make things
like doing high-quality text and open
jail very very easy then we have a great
session that if you're doing any OpenGL
development you have to send session 209
which is the OpenGL optimizations one
thing that I realize been working with a
lot of developers are using OpenGL is in
many cases they're leaving performance
on the floor on the platform and it's a
mini case you have a great tool set and
this session will provide a lot of
information for you to learn how to take
a look at your applications and figure
out how to unlock the true performance
potential of both the GPUs and also the
Macintosh is a platform and Mac OS 10
and then another thing that might be
interesting is session to 11 which is
gonna be on Friday which is introduction
to court services now this is a non
drawing API in courts but one of the
things it does it's very important as it
manages the display so a lot of OpenGL
developers have need to find out what
the configuration of this play is what
display modes available on
the particular display are and this is
the core api's that we really want
developers to adopt and use in their
applications to do things which is
screen capture and display
reconfiguration so you should attend
that and then also we have our hardware
partners ati are here this year and then
session to 12 which is also on friday
they're going to sort of push the
envelope and show what you can do with
their latest generation of GPU hardware
and also programmable features because
their demo team is going to essentially
show what they do to create their
incredibly captivating demonstrations
that they they do to support their
announcements of their hardware so it's
going to be really cool session and it's
leverage going to leverage a lot of what
you've learned today and tomorrow and
fragment programming with from a program
session and vertex programming and then
obviously we have a feedback forum on
Friday our traditional spot the last
feedback forum but we urge you to come
back come to the feedback forum and let
us know what sort of things you want to
see in Mac OS 10 from a technology
perspective because a lot of feedback we
get at WC is what we take back and start
working from figure out what goes in the
next major release of Mac OS done so I
think we have a QA all right way of
contact information you can if you have
questions about what you've learned you
can contact mike larson who is the
presenter today and have those questions
are Jeff stalls very active with
developers directly and you can also use
him as a contact reference point I'd
also like to add my name to this list if
you had questions about the session or
any of the graphics technology is on Mac
OS 10 you can feel free to contact me
Travis Browne at Travis at apple com so
we have some additional information
these are essentially the where the art
vertex program expect can be found and
I'll leave this up here for a little bit
and what I'm actually going to do is why
I go ahead and bite the Q&A team up the
OpenGL engineering team up to the stage
and we'll actually engage in a question
and answer and I'll leave this up here
so if you want to copy information down
off this you'll have plenty of time
okay so we have some microphones in the
center right here if you have any
questions about what you've seen today
please feel free to go to microphone you
know basically announced your name and
your company and will filled your
question
you